federalist 77
the appointing power continued and other
powers of the executive considered
from the new york packet friday april
4th 1788
hamilton
to the people of the state of new york
it has been mentioned as one of the
advantages to be expected from the
cooperation of the senate in the
business of appointments that it would
contribute to the stability of the
administration
the consent of that body would be
necessary to displace as well as to a
point
a change of the chief magistrate
therefore would not occasion so violent
or so general or revolution in the
officers of the government as might be
expected if you were the sole disposer
of offices
where a man in any station had given
satisfactory evidence of his fitness for
it a new president would be restrained
from attempting a change in favor of a
person more agreeable to him by the
apprehension that the discountenance of
the senate might frustrate the attempt
and bring some degree of discredit upon
himself those who can best estimate the
value of a steady administration will be
most disposed to prize a provision which
connects the official existence of
public men with the approbation or
disapprobation of that body which from
the great permanency of its own
composition will in all probability be
less subject to inconstancy than any
other member of the government
to this union of the senate with the
president in the article of appointments
it has in some cases been suggested that
it would serve to give the president an
undue influence over the senate and in
others that it would have an opposite
tendency a strong proof that neither
suggestion is true
to state the first in its proper form is
to refute it it amounts to this
the president would have an improper
influence over the senate because the
senate would have the power of
restraining him
this is an absurdity in terms
it cannot admit of doubt that the entire
power of appointment would enable him
much more effectually to establish a
dangerous empire over that body than a
mere power of nomination subject to
their control
let us take a view of the converse of
the proposition
the senate would influence the executive
as i have had occasion to remark in
several other instances the
indistinctness of the objection forbids
a precise answer in what manner is this
influence to be exerted in relation to
what objects the power of influencing a
person in the sense in which it is here
used must imply a power of conferring a
benefit upon him
how could the senate confer a benefit
upon the president by the manner of
employing their right of negative upon
his nominations
if it be said they might sometimes
gratify him by an acquiescence and a
favorite choice when public motives
might dictate a different conduct i
answer that the instances in which the
president could be personally interested
in the result would be too few to admit
of his being materially affected by the
compliances of the senate the power
which can originate the disposition of
honors and emoluments is more likely to
attract than to be attracted by the
power which can merely obstruct their
course
if by influencing the president be meant
restraining him this is precisely what
must have been intended and it has been
shown that the restraint would be
salutary at the same time that it would
not be such as to destroy a single
advantage to be looked for from the
controlled agency of that magistrate
the right of nomination would produce
all the good of that appointment and
would in a great measure avoid its evils
upon a comparison of the plan for the
appointment of the officers of the
proposed government with that which is
established by the constitution of this
state a decided preference must be given
to the former in that plan the power of
nomination is unequivocally vested in
the executive and as there would be a
necessity for submitting each nomination
to the judgment of an entire branch of
the legislature the circumstances
attending an appointment from the mode
of conducting it would naturally become
matters of notoriety and the public
would be at no loss to determine what
part had been performed by the different
actors
the blame of a bad nomination would fall
upon the president singly and absolutely
the center of rejecting a good one would
lie entirely at the door of the senate
aggravated by the consideration of their
having counteracted the good intentions
of the executive if an ill appointment
should be made the executive for
nominating and the senate for approving
would participate though in different
degrees in the opprobrium and disgrace
the reverse of all this characterizes
the manner of appointment in this state
the council of appointment consists of
from three to five persons of whom the
governor is always one
this small body shut up in a private
apartment impenetrable to the public eye
proceed to the execution of the trust
committed to them it is known that the
governor claims the right of nomination
upon the strength of some ambiguous
expressions in the constitution but it
is not known to what extent or in what
manner he exercises it nor upon what
occasions he is contradicted or opposed
the center of a bad appointment on
account of the uncertainty of its author
and for want of a determinant object has
neither poignancy nor duration and while
an unbounded field for cabal and
intrigue lies open all idea of
responsibility is lost
the most that the public can know is
that the governor claims the right of
nomination that two out of the
inconsiderable number of four men can
too often be managed without much
difficulty that if some of the members
of a particular council should happen to
be of an uncomplying character it is
frequently not impossible to get rid of
their opposition by regulating the times
of meeting in such a manner as to render
their attendance inconvenient and that
from whatever cause it may proceed a
great number of very improper
appointments are from time to time made
whether a governor of this state avails
himself to the ascendant he must
necessarily have in this delicate and
important part of the administration to
prefer two offices men who are best
qualified for them or whether he
prostitutes that advantage to the
advancement of persons whose chief merit
is their implicit devotion to his will
and to the support of a despicable and
dangerous system of personal influence
are questions which unfortunately for
the community can only be the subjects
of speculation and conjecture
every mere council of appointment
however constituted will be a conclave
in which cabal and intrigue will have
their full scope their number without an
unwarrantable increase of expense cannot
be large enough to preclude a facility
of combination and as each member will
have his friends and connections to
provide for the desire of mutual
gratification will beget a scandalous
bartering of votes and bargaining for
places
the private attachments of one man might
easily be satisfied but to satisfy the
private attachments of a dozen or of 20
men would occasion a monopoly of all the
principal employments of the government
in a few families and would lead more
directly to an aristocracy or an
oligarchy than any measure that could be
contrived
if to avoid an accumulation of offices
there was to be a frequent change in the
persons who were to compose the council
this would involve the mischiefs of a
mutable administration in their full
extent such a council would also be more
liable to executive influence than the
senate because they would be fewer in
number and would act less immediately
under the public inspection
such a council in fine as a substitute
for the plan of the convention would be
productive of an increase of expense a
multiplication of the evils which spring
from favoritism and intrigue in the
distribution of public honors a decrease
of stability in the administration of
the government and a diminution of the
security against an undue influence of
the executive
and yet such a council has been warmly
contended for as an essential amendment
in the proposed constitution
i could not with propriety conclude my
observations on the subject of
appointments without taking notice of a
scheme for which there have appeared
some though but few advocates i mean
that of uniting the house of
representatives in the power of making
them i shall however do little more than
mention it as i cannot imagine that it
is likely to gain the countenance of any
considerable part of the community a
body so fluctuating and at the same time
so numerous can never be deemed proper
for the exercise of that power
its unfitness will appear manifest to
all when it is recollected that in half
a century it may consist of three or
four hundred persons
all the advantages of the stability both
of the executive and of the senate would
be defeated by this union and infinite
delays and embarrassments would be
occasioned
the example of most of the states in
their local constitutions encourages us
to reprobate the idea
the only remaining powers of the
executive are comprehended in giving
information to congress of the state of
the union in recommending to their
consideration such measures as he shall
judge expedient in convening them or
either branch upon extraordinary
occasions in adjourning them when they
cannot themselves agree upon the time of
adjournment in receiving ambassadors and
other public ministers in faithfully
executing the laws and in commissioning
all the officers of the united states
except some cavals about the power of
convening either house of the
legislature and that of receiving
ambassadors no objection has been made
to this class of authorities nor could
they possibly admit of any
it required indeed an insatiable avidity
for censure to invent exceptions to the
parts which have been accepted to
in regard to the power of convening
either house of the legislature i shall
barely remark that in respect to the
senate at least we can readily discover
a good reason for it as this body has a
concurrent power with the executive in
the article of treaties it might often
be necessary to call it together with a
view to this object when it would be
unnecessary and improper to convene the
house of representatives
as to the reception of ambassadors what
i have said in a former paper will
furnish a sufficient answer
we have now completed a survey of the
structure and powers of the executive
department which i have endeavored to
show combines as far as republican
principles will admit all the requisites
to energy
the remaining inquiry is does it also
combine the requisites to safety in a
republican sense a due dependence on the
people a due responsibility
the answer to this question has been
anticipated in the investigation of its
other characteristics and is
satisfactorily deducible from these
circumstances
from the election of the president once
in four years by persons immediately
chosen by the people for that purpose
and from his being at all times liable
to impeachment trial dismission from
office incapacity to serve in any other
and a forfeiture of life and a state by
subsequent prosecution in the common
course of law but these precautions
great as they are are not the only ones
which the plan of the convention has
provided in favor of the public security
in the only instances in which the abuse
of the executive authority was
materially to be feared the chief
magistrate of the united states would by
that plan be subjected to the control of
a branch of the legislative body
what more could be desired by an
enlightened and reasonable people
publius